CPU/Machine init - part 5.1
================================================================================

Understanding PCI/PCIe
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

We must understand how the PCI/PCIe bus works before we proceed. [This](https://stackoverflow.com/a/3215958/6655884) stackoverflow answer gives a very good introduction. Basically, your CPU has a data and address bus. The data bus is the bus that informs the RAM about which address you want to access, and the data bus is where this data is delivered through.

https://i.stack.imgur.com/ra1Km.jpg

However, not only the memory is plugged to the address and data buses. We can take advantage of more buses by simply creating extra switches that can be activated through CPU instructions. These switches tells if we want to access the RAM or the I/O controller or any other thing.

"Clearly the CPU needs to talk to either memory or the I/O device, never both. To distinguish between the two, one of the control lines called "M/#IO" asserts whether the CPU wants to talk to memory (line=high) or an I/O device (line=low).

The IN instruction reads from an I/O device, OUT writes. When you use the IN or OUT instructions, the M/#IO is not asserted (held low), so memory doesn't respond and the I/O chip does. For the memory-oriented instructions, M/#IO is asserted so CPU talks to the RAM, and IO devices stay out of the communication."

Now you now how RAM and I/O access works. We can now proceed to understand how PCI/PCIe works.

[OSDEV page on PCI](https://wiki.osdev.org/PCI#Memory_Mapped_PCI_Configuration_Space_Access) is a good start to understand, so I'll just summarize it:

There are two ways to access the PCI configuration space, which is a way to use software to initialize and configure each PCI device. We'll talk only about the Configuration Space Access Mechanism #1. 

"Two 32-bit I/O locations are used, the first location (0xCF8) is named CONFIG_ADDRESS, and the second (0xCFC) is called CONFIG_DATA. CONFIG_ADDRESS specifies the configuration address that is required to be accessed, while accesses to CONFIG_DATA will actually generate the configuration access and will transfer the data to or from the CONFIG_DATA register."

So instead of accessing RAM memory we access these two 32 bits locations. The `outl(port, value)`  instruction is used to inform which address we want to access, and `inl(port)` to retrieve data from the port. 
