CPU/Machine init - part 5.1
================================================================================

Understanding PCI/PCIe
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

We must understand how the PCI/PCIe bus works before we proceed. [This](https://stackoverflow.com/a/3215958/6655884) stackoverflow answer gives a very good introduction. Basically, your CPU has a data and address bus. The data bus is the bus that informs the RAM about which address you want to access, and the data bus is where this data is delivered through.

https://i.stack.imgur.com/ra1Km.jpg

However, not only the memory is plugged to the address and data buses. We can take advantage of more buses by simply creating extra switches that can be activated through CPU instructions. These switches tells if we want to access the RAM or the I/O controller or any other thing.

"Clearly the CPU needs to talk to either memory or the I/O device, never both. To distinguish between the two, one of the control lines called "M/#IO" asserts whether the CPU wants to talk to memory (line=high) or an I/O device (line=low).

The IN instruction reads from an I/O device, OUT writes. When you use the IN or OUT instructions, the M/#IO is not asserted (held low), so memory doesn't respond and the I/O chip does. For the memory-oriented instructions, M/#IO is asserted so CPU talks to the RAM, and IO devices stay out of the communication."

Now you now how RAM and I/O access works. We can now proceed to understand how PCI/PCIe works.

[OSDEV page on PCI](https://wiki.osdev.org/PCI#Memory_Mapped_PCI_Configuration_Space_Access) is a good start to understand, so I'll just summarize it:

There are two ways to access the PCI configuration space, which is a way to use software to initialize and configure each PCI device. We'll talk only about the Configuration Space Access Mechanism #1. 

"Two 32-bit I/O locations are used, the first location (0xCF8) is named CONFIG_ADDRESS, and the second (0xCFC) is called CONFIG_DATA. CONFIG_ADDRESS specifies the configuration address that is required to be accessed, while accesses to CONFIG_DATA will actually generate the configuration access and will transfer the data to or from the CONFIG_DATA register."

So instead of accessing RAM memory we access these two 32 bits locations. The `outl(port, value)`  instruction is used to inform which address we want to access, and `inl(port)` to retrieve data from the port. 

I've made a question on stackoverflow to understand PCI better and you can read [this](https://stackoverflow.com/a/61631323/6655884) very useful answer that I explain below.

To the first I/O location (0xCF8) we pass a 32 bit structure that OSDev page explains really well:

31 	        30 - 24 	23 - 16 	  15 - 11 	       10 - 8 	             7 - 0
Enable Bit 	Reserved 	Bus Number 	Device Number 	Function Number 	Register Offset¹

in this structure we can select which BUS, Device and function number we want to configure. 

"The least significant byte selects the offset into the 256-byte configuration space available through this method. Since all reads and writes must be both 32-bits and aligned to work on all implementations, the two lowest bits of CONFIG_ADDRESS must always be zero, with the remaining six bits allowing you to choose each of the 64 32-bit words."

Now we know how to access each 256-byte configuration space. We can then store and retrieve data. As explained by Brendan in his answer, one of these fields is called BAR and it's where we configure the addresses for the PCI device:

"Other fields include "BARs" (Base Address Registers, starting at offset 0x10 in a device's configuration space) which tell the device which address range (in IO port space or physical address space) the device should accept. For these, a device will be hard-wired to use either IO ports or physical addresses (and that can not be changed) and the size of the area will also be hard-wired (and that can also not be changed). Because these things are hardwired, you can write zeros to a BAR and find out what was hardwired (to determine the size of the area, and if the device needs IO port space or physical address space)."

TODO: put information about PCIe here